
Connecting 
green 
space 
supply 
and 
demand: 
modeling 
the 
walkable 
environment 
of 
European 
cities 


Abstract 


In an increasingly urbanized world, peoples’ access to urban green spaces (UGS) is crucial. Former studies have 
mostly focused on determining whether urban dwellers have access to UGS or not. We used OpenStreetMap 
(OSM) and Urban Atlas (UA) data to analyze the walkable environment – the connecting area between green 
space demand and supply – of European cities. In this study, we i.) to developed a modeling approach that 
applies the Detour Index (DI) and Local Significance (LS) walkability indices, ii.) compared the results on a 
European scale, and iii.) implemented the indices by showing possible use cases for city planners. By employing 
the Local Significance (LS) index, we revealed potential overcrowding effects at UGS in southern Germany. 
With the Detour Index (DI), we could not only show how many urban residents have access to UGS within 500 
meters network distance, but also estimate the efficiency of the routes people take. Future research should focus 
on i.) accounting for the number of UGS people can reach, ii.) augment our results with further environmental 
data and iii.) account for other means of transportation, like cycling or public transport. 

1 Introduction 


In the Anthropocene, rapid urbanization takes place 
globally. 55% of the global population were living in 
cities by 2018 and 68% are projected to do so in 2050. 
A growing urban population depends increasingly on 
urban ecosystems (Elmqvist et al., 2021; UN, 2019). 
Ecosystems supply ecosystem services (ES) which are 
critical to human well-being (Fisher et al., 2009). Living
 in proximity of urban green spaces (UGS) can help 
alleviate the impacts of climate change on an aging urban
 population, as well as improve overall public health 
in cities (Kabisch et al., 2021a,b). Thus, having access
 to UGS can enhance urban inhabitants’ quality 
of life (Poelman, 2018). Likewise, the United Nations 
have agreed to provide universal access to public green 
spaces by 2030 in Sustainable Development Goal 11.7 
(UN, 2017). 
In Europe, 74% of the population are living in cities 
(UN, 2019). Here, the population pressure on UGS 
might be amplified by the compact city paradigm, 
which is popular among European city planners: A 
more compact city can result in shorter traveling 

distances but also in more overcrowding effects (Commission
 of European Communities, 1990; Burton.2003, 
Wolff.2019). Accordingly, more people living in proximity
 to and benefitting from an UGS also increase the 
pressure on its ecological functions (Wolff and Haase, 
2019). In order to detect such mismatches in green 
space supply and demand and to provide equal access 
to UGS, mapping UGS accessibility is key (Larondelle 
and Haase, 2013). 
The walkable environment – the space in between urban
 dwellers and UGS – not only affects the quality 
of ES and, thus, the accessibility of UGS (Syrbe and 
Walz, 2012). Availability of UGS in walking distance 
can improve overall public health and increase the resilience
 of city dwellers (Kabisch et al., 2021a; Richardson
 et al., 2013). A proper modeling of UGS accessibility
 must, therefore, put emphasis on modeling the 
walkable environment of a city (Wolff and Haase, 2019). 
Yet, easy to use and open source tools for comparatively
 modeling the walkability of European cities are 
lacking (Kabisch et al., 2016). 
Availability and accessibility of UGS in Europe have 
been analyzed and compared in multiple studies. In 
their 2016 paper, Kabisch et al. carried out an assessment
 of green space availability in 299 EU cities. They 
used a population grid of 1 km² 
and land use data (urban
 atlas) to calculate the population within a buffer 
distance of UGS (Kabisch et al., 2016). The use of Euclidean
 (direct) distance in accessibility analysis has 
been found to underestimate spatial distances and to 
overestimate the provision of UGS in contrast to using 
network distance, though (Sander et al., 2010; Moseley
 et al., 2013). In 2016, the Joint Research Center 
(JRC) of the European Union developed an indicator 
for areas that are served by UGS in European cities. 
In their analysis, the authors used a 10 m² 
resolution 
land use data grid and a 100 m² 
population mosaic 
and a network-based approach (Pafi et al., 2016). In 
another analysis from 2018, the JRC used urban atlas
 data and a street network to assess the area that 
urban dwellers can reach in a walking distance of 10 
minutes. Their analysis also resulted in an area per 
population measure on a city level (Poelman, 2018). 
Wolff and Haase looked into the connection between 
green space supply and residential density in 905 European
 cities. They found a strong link between residential
 density, population size and location of the cities 
(Wolff and Haase, 2019). Further studies have developed
 methods to account for problems associated with 
fixed catchment sizes by using variable catchment approaches
 (Luo and Whippo, 2012). 
In a 2021 paper, Wolff coupled the population pressure
 and proximity perspectives by applying network 
characteristics. In his analysis, he found two promising 
indicators, the Detour Index (DI) and the Local Significance
 (LS) (Wolff, 2021). The DI is a measure of the 
efficiency of a route taken to reach a goal (Barth´elemy, 
2018). Hence, the DI can be used to model barriers 
that people have to overcome on their way to UGS 
(Wolff, 2021). The LS is a simple measure to describe 
the relevance of different edges of a network (Esch 
et al., 2014). With a little modification, the LS can be 
utilized to model use-intensity of those edges connecting
 population demand with UGS. As a consequence, 
LS might serve as a spatial indicator for overuse of UGS 
(Wolff, 2021). 
Previous research did rarely account for the mutual 
dependencies of supply and demand, or did it put 
the focus on the walkable environment (Syrbe and 
Grunewald, 2017). Using fixed distances for assessing 

green space accessibility might lead to numerical 
quantities instead of focusing on the location of the 
mismatch between ES supply and demand (Higgs 
et al., 2012; Syrbe and Grunewald, 2017). Furthermore,
 we saw mostly one perspective being used to 
assess green space accessibility (provision, population 
pressure or proximity). But a high provision of UGS 
in a city, for example, does not necessarily indicate 
an equal or adequate distribution of UGS (Poelman, 
2018). 
In addition to the previous points, the mentioned studies,
 if on a larger scale, were carried out on a coarse 
resolution (Kabisch et al. 2016, European Commission 
2016). A higher resolution can reveal spatial patterns 
at a finer scale enabling targeted intervention while also 
reducing uncertainties that are introduced by e.g. a 
population grid or a city block aggregation as in urban
 atlas data (Barth´elemy, 2018; Esch et al., 2014). 
Achieving a high resolution on a large scale can be challenging,
 though, since freely available and comparable 
datasets are scarce (Feltynowski et al., 2018; Dworczyk 
and Burkhard, 2021). 
All things considered, knowledge about green space accessibility
 is important for planning and decision making
 and mapping the capacity, flow and demand of ES 
in urban areas has been found to facilitate urban planning
 (Bar´o et al., 2016). Improving the modeling of 
the walkable environment with a combination of population
 pressure and proximity aspects of green space accessibility
 might prove promising to detect mismatches 
between UGS supply and demand (Biernacka and Kronenberg,
 2019; Biernacka et al., 2020). Finally, municipalities
 across European countries still provide a 
mixture of different indices for measuring green space 
supply and demand (Kabisch et al. 2016). Comparing
 cities can provide a basis for better understanding 
of urban processes, though (Wolff et al., 2020a). Yet, 
there is no easy-to-handle and comparable tool using 
a high resolution on a European scale with publicly 
available data and software. 

2 Conceptualization 


The availability of UGS can be defined by the “amount 
of green area in a defined distance to where urban residents
 live” (Kabisch et al., 2016). Having actual access 
to UGS might be limited by additional factors, though. 


The physical accessibility, for example, can be limited 
by fences, opening hours of an UGS, or the detours 
people have to take to reach them. Additionally, accessibility
 may be limited by perceived overcrowding effects
 through population pressure (Kabisch et al., 2016; 
Wolff et al., 2020b). As use intensity can influence ES, 
it can create a mismatch between supply and demand 
(Syrbe and Grunewald, 2017). 
Approaches that accounted for the supply and demand 
aspects of ES have usually postulated a population 
that is close to the places of ES origin. Since ES are 
rarely consumed by humans at the same place where 
they are produced by the ecosystem, we distinguish service
 providing areas (SPA) and service demanding areas
 (SDA). Service providing areas (SPA) represent the 
supplying side, the spatial unit where the ES are generated
 (Syrbe and Walz, 2012; Dworczyk and Burkhard, 
2021). In cities, UGS supply for example the cultural 
ES of recreation for residents (Dickinson and Hobbs, 
2017). Service demanding areas (SDA) embody the 
places where the potential demand for ES arises, e.g. 
the places where people live. In the case of UGS in an 
urban environment, residential areas or buildings are 
an example for SDA (Dworczyk and Burkhard, 2021). 
In order to account for physical and perceived barriers
 to green space access, we have to take a look at 
the space between SPA and SDA, the service connecting
 areas (SCA). SCA can be used to show the flow 
of ES between SPA and SDA areas (Syrbe and Walz, 
2012; Dworczyk and Burkhard, 2021). Regarding the 
scenario of UGS in cities, SCA are the walkable environment,
 i.e. the routes residents take to benefit from 
the ES in their neighborhood (Syrbe and Grunewald, 
2017). Consequently, the SCA in this case are the walkable
 street network of a city. 
Three perspectives have been used in past studies to 
model the SCA for UGS: The proximity, provision and 
pressure perspectives. The proximity perspective considers
 the space between supply and demand, e.g. the 
walking distance between people’s homes and the UGS, 
thus highlighting the SCA. A proximity perspective 
is necessary to account for barriers and other characteristics
 of the network. (Higgs et al., 2012; Wolff, 
2021). Furthermore, green space proximity measures 
have been found to be among the most important factors
 influencing perceived accessibility, especially for 
minority groups (Ibes, 2015; Wang et al., 2015). The 

widely used green space provision perspective models 
the flow from green area to buildings, thus, focusing on 
UGS provision (area / person). Secondly, the less often 
used population pressure perspective describes the flow 
from residential buildings (i.e. the population) to the 
UGS. The focus here is on the pressure of the residents 
on an UGS or their demand for green areas (person / 
area) (Kimpton, 2017). 
Modeling the walkable environment of European cities 
by including the three perspectives mentioned above 
and using a network characteristics approach. We want 
to answer the questions: 
1.) What does a modeling approach look like that estimates
 the walkability between green space supply and 
demand in cities based on high resolution data? 
2.) How to incorporate publicly accessible data and 
open source software in order to allow i.) a reproduction
 over time (e.g. with more recent data), and 
ii.) comparative approaches covering a large sample of 
cities. 
3.) How can easily understandable and applicable indicators
 be used in order to support urban planning in 
detecting mismatches between demand and supply? 
The objectives that we derived from these questions 
are i.) to develop a modeling approach that applies 
walkability indices, ii.) to compare the results on a 
European scale, and iii.) to implement the indices by 
showing possible use cases for city planners. 

3 Methods and Data 


We applied our analysis to 832 European cities. To 
account for the ability of city dwellers to leave their 
city if they live in proximity to a city border, we included
 UGS from a buffer of 1 km surrounding the city 
boundary (Wolff et al., 2020a). The city delineation 
stems from the Urban Audit dataset of the European 
Union (Urban Audit, 2022). 

3.1 
Data 
For the analysis of the walkable environment of European
 cities, we needed available and comparable data 
on public green spaces and residential buildings and 
their respective entry points. Additionally, the analysis 
required information on the population living in each 
residential building and a network that connects the 
buildings with the green spaces. We aimed to incorporate
 publicly accessible data and open source software 
in order to allow i.) reproduction (e.g. with more recent
 data) and ii.) comparative approaches covering a 
large sample of cities. We used Urban Atlas (UA) 2018 
and OpenStreetMap (OSM) as our main data sources. 
All analysis was carried out and tested in R 4.1.3 using 
RStudio version 1.4.1717 and are made available on the 
GitHub repository www.github.com/blabohm/MA. To 
ensure the best possible data coverage, we downloaded 
the latest version possible of OSM (April / May 2022). 
Urban Atlas (UA): UA is a land use / land cover 
(LULC) product from the Copernicus program of 
the European Union. The 2018 UA version provides 

Europe-wide comparable data for 788 Functional 
Urban Areas with more than 50.000 inhabitants. It 
represents 17 urban and 10 rural LULC classes with 
a MMU of 0.25 and 1 ha, respectively. In addition 
to the spatial data, UA contains information on the 
population for the residential land use classes. Since 
Copernicus does not offer an API, we downloaded the 
latest UA version available at the time of this study 
(c13) by hand. 
OpenStreetMap (OSM): OSM is a community-based 
project that provides free geospatial data. The OSM 
community seeks to create a database of the entire 
planet that is free and editable. For the analysis we 
downloaded the OSM data with the identifiers ‘building’
 and ‘highway’. Since OSM is a community-based 
mapping service, the latest version of OSM data is expected
 to have the most information. We acquired the 
OSM data via the OSM API, which we accessed via 
a custom-made tool that heavily relies on the R package
 ‘osmdata’. For information on the OSM download 
tool, see Appendix 1c. 

3.2 
Data 
processing 
Street network: The network, in this analysis, represents
 the walkable environment of a city, which connects
 the entry points of the UGS with those of the 
residential buildings. To acquire information on the 
street network of a city, we downloaded OSM data with 
the identifier ‘highway’, which represents all linestrings 
in the OSM database that are associated with streets 
and paths. To secure comparability across European 
countries, we used all OSM highway classes, except for 
the class ‘highways’ as not being suitable for walking.
 Linestrings identified with the string ‘highway’ 
represent motorways which are reserved for motorized 
use only. To ensure network connectivity and reduce 
overlap, we cleaned the resulting network following the 
tutorial on network data pre-processing and cleaning 
by Lucas van der Meer (van der Meer et al. (2019), 
https://luukvdmeer.github.io/sfnetworks, May 2022). 
Further information on the network pre-processing and 
cleaning steps can be found in Appendix 2a. 
Residential buildings: The following analysis requires 
information on a cities’ residential buildings, their entry
 points and on how many persons inhabit each building.
 We filtered the OSM ‘building’ polygons for residential
 buildings. We only kept those OSM buildings 
whose centroids were contained inside of urban atlas 
residential areas (UA class code 11100-11240). 
Residential building entries: To detect building entries, 
we first calculated the centroids of each building. Centroids
 had to satisfy the constraint, that the point has 
to lie inside the polygon (Pebesma, 2022). We snapped 
the centroids to the closest point on the cleaned street 
network and assumed the resulting points to be the 
building entries. 
Population per building: To assign each OSM building 
a reasonable population count, we used a simple area 
weighting disaggregation approach (Li et al., 2007). 
The UA dataset provides information on population 
mostly on a city block level. We disaggregated this 
data to the building level by distributing the population
 proportionally to a buildings base area. This workflow
 follows the assumption, that the building structure,
 and thus the population per base area inside one 
city block is similar. For buildings that were contained 
inside UA residential polygons that erroneously did not 
have population values, we used the mean population 
per square-meter of the corresponding UA residential 
class in the city. 
Green spaces: The last data point required for the analysis
 is information on publicly accessible UGS and their 
entry points. We filtered the UA data for the classes 
‘green urban areas’ (UA class code 14100) and ‘forests’ 
(UA class code 31000) to ensure that all green spaces 
that are used in the analysis are publicly accessible. All 
green spaces in the UA dataset come with information 
on area, which we double checked for consistency. 
Green space entries: To detect green space entries, we 
intersected the outline of the UA green spaces with 
the cleaned network. Furthermore, we applied different
 buffer sizes to the green space polygons as sensitivity
 analysis. We used the resulting points as entry 
points of the green spaces for the further analysis. In 
case a green space did not receive any entry points, we 
incrementally increased the buffer sizes. Further information
 on the method and the validation / sensitivity 
analysis can be found in Appendix 2c. 
Network blending: In the process of network blending, 
the entry points of the residential buildings and the 
UGS (now called ‘nodes’) are being ‘blended’ into the 
network. During this process, the lines (now called 
‘edges’) will be broken at every node location. The 
node location now represents the new starting / ending 
points of the newly created edges. For more detailed 
information on this process see Appendix 2d. 

3.3 Analysis 
Our first objective was to develop a modeling approach 
that applies the Detour Index (DI) and Local Significance
 (LS) walkability indices. For computational considerations,
 we limited the catchment area around each 
building to 500 meters network distance. We calculated 
the Detour Index (DI) and the Local Significance (LS) 
index for each UGS inside the city core plus a buffer of 1 
km. We accounted for the maximum walking distance 
by calculating both indices for the residential buildings 
within a network distance of 500 m between a building 
entry and the nearest entry point of a UGS. 
Detour 
Index 
(DI): 
The DI is an indicator of barriers
 in a network. It accounts for the efficiency of the 
routes that residents take on their way to the nearest 
UGS (Wolff, 2021). The DI combines the Euclidean 
distance, i.e. the direct connection between two points,
In the case of 
this analysis, the two points are the entry points of a 
residential building and the nearest entry point of a 
UGS. The DI can assume values between 0 and 1. A 
DI value of 1 represents a straight line between building
 entry and UGS entry, while a DI value closer to 0 
means that the inhabitants of the building have to take 
a sub-optimal route to the nearest UGS. If one building 
has access to several UGS within a network distance of 
500 m, we decided to use the mean DI value. 
Local 
Significance 
(LS): 
The LS is usually used as an 
indicator of edge importance in a network analysis 
(Esch et al., 2014). We use a modified version from 

Wolff 2021 as an indicator of how many people have 
access to an UGS. The LS also accounts for the size 
of an UGS as well as the distance between people’s 
homes and the UGS entries (Wolff, 2021): 

This indicator can assume infinite values. 
A higher population and area, as well as a lower network
 distance lead to higher LS values. We attached 
the LS values to each segment (edge) of the path between
 building and UGS entries. We summed the LS 
values of overlapping paths from multiple buildings, 
leading to higher values on higher frequented edges. A 
more detailed summary on index building can be found 
in Appendix 3. 

To demonstrate application possibilities of the indices, 
we visualized the DI and LS values for the area surrounding
 the Lene-Voigt-Park (LVP) in Leipzig. The 
city of Leipzig is the largest city in Saxony, Germany. 
After a massive population loss in the 1990s, the city 
faced a major regrowth since 2012. Rising population 
numbers led to increased pressure on the open spaces 
of the city. The LVP was a former train station area 
and has been out of use since 1942. In the 2000s, it was 
converted to a public park and is fully open since 2004 
(Wolff et al., 2017; Stadt-Leipzig, 2022). Its diverse 
history and the population dynamic make the LVP an 
interesting test case for the demonstration of our results.
 Since LS values tend to grow exponentially, we 
chose to use a logarithmic scale for visualization. 
In our second objective, we wanted to compare the indices
 on a European level and assess in which cities 
the OSM data availability would facilitate our analysis.
 For comparing the distribution of DI values in the 
European countries, we plotted the DI against the relative
 cumulative population in each city. We aggregated 
the results to country level for easier visualization. Furthermore,
 we mapped the percentage of people in a city 
that have a DI of 0.8 or higher. To compare the LS values
 across European cities, we used the cities’ average 
of the summed LS values at the green space entries 
per UGS. We assessed the OSM data coverage for 834 
European cities. We did so by computing the percentage
 of UA residential polygons that are covered by at 
least one OSM building polygon. As a compromise, we 
used a threshold of 85% OSM coverage (at least 85% 
of the UA residential Polygons have to contain at least 
one OSM building polygon) for the comparison of our 
results across European cities. 
The final objective was to implement the two indices 
we developed to demonstrate possible use cases for city 
planners. To describe the impact of changes in different 
model parameters, we tested three different scenarios 
and calculated the change of the index values to the 
base model. 

Alternative 1–Unlimited access: 
In the first scenario 
we demonstrated how the LS and DI indicators change 
if all barriers obstructing access to the LVP were removed.
 To model unlimited access, we distributed hypothetical
 entry points every 5 meters on the network 
surrounding the LVP and applied the walkability indices
 to the changed conditions. 

Alternative 2 – Green space development: 
In the second
 scenario we investigated the impact of a development
 of the green spaces surrounding the LVP to 
residential buildings. We assumed the following green 
spaces in the north of the LVP to be developed to high 
density residential buildings: Reudnitzer Park, Staphaniplatz,
 and the green space between T¨aubchenweg, 
Perthesstraße and Gerichtsweg. To implement this scenario,
 we converted the former green space entry points 
to building entries. We multiplied the size of the parks 
by the 95th percentile of the population per square 
meter value derived from the urban atlas high density 
residential class in the surrounding two kilometers. We 
distributed the outcome uniformly across the former 
green space entries and applied the two walkability indices.
 
Alternative 3 – Population increase: 
In the third scenario
 we modeled a population increase in the residential
 areas surrounding the LVP. For each residential 
building in a distance of 2 km to the LVP, we increased 
the population value to the 95th percentile of the respective
 urban atlas residential class. We then applied 
the DI and LS indices to the changed conditions. 

Alternative 4 – Ensemble model: 
In the final scenario 
we applied the changes from the unlimited access, the 
green space development and the population increase 
scenarios and gathered them in one ensemble model. 

4 Results 


In this study, we i.) to developed a modeling approach 
that applies the DI and LS walkability indices, ii.) compared
 the results on a European scale, and iii.) implemented
 the indices by showing possible use cases for 
city planners. 

4.1 Applying walkability indices 
In this section, we present the results of applying the 
two walkability indices to the test case, the Lene Voigt 
Park (LVP) in Leipzig, Germany. Figure 3a displays 
the local significance (LS) values that we calculated for 
the city of Leipzig, Germany. The map shows the area 
east of the city center (top right corner of the map). In 
the center of the map, highlighted with a darker green, 
is located the LVP. . Other green spaces are depicted 
in a lighter green, buildings and the network in white 
and gray, respectively. Lower LS values are displayed 
in blue shades, higher values in red shades. 
Due to the high density of green spaces and residential 
buildings in the area, an overall high level of LS values 
can be observed. In general, LS values tend to grow towards
 green space entry points – i.e. higher LS values 
can be observed in closer distance to UGS. Due to the 
cumulative nature of our LS representation, this effect 
symbolizes street segments with the potential for overcrowding.
 Furthermore, high LS values are associated 
with direct connections between parks and residential 
buildings. The highest LS values can be found at park 
entries adjacent to streets which connect UGS to areas 
with high population, indicating street segments that 
are highly visited for routes towards UGS. The eastern 
part of the LVP close to the Riebeckstraße is a good 
example for this (marker B on the map). Here, we find 
high LS values at those parts of the streets that lead to 
the residential areas in the north, east and south-east. 
Furthermore, the Josephinenstraße (marker A) which 
connects the center of the LVP to the next larger park 
in the south, the Friedenspark, displays high LS values. 
On the other hand, we can make out lower LS values at 
streets with residential buildings that are close to the 
cut-off threshold of 500 meters distance to the nearest
 green space. For example, in the southeast of the 
map, in many streets, the blue shade is getting brighter 
with each street segment until it switches over to red 
shades. With each building entry, more inhabitants 

are expected to take these routes towards the nearest 
green space. This increases the LS values of the street 
segments. 
Figure 3b displays the detour index (DI) east of the 
city center of Leipzig. Higher DI values are depicted in 
blue shades, lower ones in red shades. High DI values 
can be found at buildings that are located at streets 
which lead directly to a green space entry. Along these 
streets there are straight formations of buildings with 
high DI values as can be seen in the south of the LVP. 
In contrast, there occur clusters of low DI values in 
areas where larger detours have to be taken to reach a 
park entry. Such areas can be found in the northeast of 
the map. Furthermore, we can observe low DI values 
at buildings that are close to several UGS but whose 
routes towards one or more UGS are inefficient. Some 
buildings that are directly adjacent to one UGS, but 
have to take small detours to the nearest green space 
entry point, also show low DI values. Lastly, we see 
that there are buildings close to UGS with high DI 
values but that have to cross larger streets or other 
obstacles to reach the green space entry point. 

4.2 Comparing walkability indices 
Here, we present the results of the OSM data coverage
 assessment and, later, compare the two walkability 
indices across Europe. Figure 2 depicts the OSM coverage,
 i.e. the relative share of UA polygons that are 
covered by at least one OSM building polygon. Most 
cities in central Europe – in particular in Poland, the 
Czech Republic, Austria, Northern Italy, Switzerland, 
France, Belgium and the Netherlands – exhibit a very 
high OSM coverage of >90%. In the UK, northern 
Spain and the southeast of Europe, we see more cities 
with an OSM coverage of around 50%. In Portugal and 
the south of Spain few cities express an OSM coverage
 above 50%, and most cities are around 25% OSM 
coverage. In figure 4 we see two exemplary cities – 
Vienna as an example for a high OSM coverage and 
Lisbon as an example for a low OSM coverage. The 
city of Vienna, Austria is a prime example for a high 
OSM coverage with 98.7% of the UA residential building
 polygons covered by at least one OSM building (see 
figure 4a). A source of error explaining a fraction of 
the imperfect coverage in most cities are misclassified 
UA polygons (see Appendix 1b). In another share of 
UA polygons, the population values might have been so 
small that none of the OSM buildings received a population
 count, so they got filtered out during the data 
cleaning process (see Appendix 2b). In contrast, in Lisbon,
 Portugal 55.6% of the UA polygons are covered 
by OSM buildings. As we see in figure 4b, the OSM 
building coverage in Lisbon is declining with higher 
distance from the city center. Further in the south of 
the city, OSM coverage tends to be more incomplete, 
as well. Where OSM buildings are present, the workflow
 of generating LS and DI indices was still functional 
(see appendix 3). On the other hand, large parts of the 
residential areas of Lisbon have no OSM coverage and, 
thus did not get index values. This lack of DI values 
for a large part of the population would complicate a 
comparison with other cities that have a more complete
 coverage. Also, comparing the LS values could 
prove unreliable, even though we use the average value 
at green space entry for the above analysis. Missing 
residential buildings in the service area of green spaces 
would lead to LS values that might be lower than expected.
 Due to these inconsistencies, we decided to 
exclude all cities with an OSM coverage of less than 
85% from our analysis. Most of Europe’s capital cities 
feature a high OSM coverage and by choosing a threshold
 of 85%, we only had to exclude 5 of them from 
our analysis (Lisbon, Athens, Budapest, London and 
Madrid). 
In this section we compare the DI and LS indices in 
533 European cities with an OSM coverage of 85% or 

higher (see previous section). To compare the DI of 
European cities, we will have a look at the cities’ DI 
per relative cumulative population. For the example of 
the LVP, a share of roughly 55% of the population in 
the surrounding area has a DI of 0.8 or higher.
In figure 5 we demonstrate this share of population for 
each city. Here, we can observe a clustering of cities 
with mid-to high shares of population with DI values 
above 0.8 in northern and central European countries. 
This cluster consists especially of cities in the Netherlands,
 Belgium and Germany, as well as the western 
parts of Poland and the Czech Republic. In France, 
the UK, Italy and the eastern part of Poland, we see 
a larger share of cities with a lower percentage of population
 with DI values greater than 0.8. Most Balkan 
countries, as well as Ireland have no cities with a >20% 
share of population in the highest DI segment. As we 
can see in figure x, the distribution of DI values plotted
 against the cumulative, relative population varies 
strongly across countries. The ending points of the 
lines show the percentage of people with green spaces 
in a network distance of 500 meters. The slopes of 
the lines indicate how direct the inhabitants of a country
 can travel to the green spaces they have access to. 
On the top end there are mostly northern and central 
European countries where more than 85% of the urban
 population can reach green spaces in 500 meters 
network distance. On the lower end there are mostly 
southern and south eastern European countries where 
less than 30% of the population or less live in 500 meters
 network distance of green spaces. It is notable, 
that on both ends of the spectrum, the sample size 
is limited to only a few cities (top: FI = 3, SE = 5, 
LU=1,bottom: AL=2,XK=1,RS=3,RO = 
5). Yet, there are countries with large city samples 
and a high percentage of population reaching green 
spaces in 500 meters network distance, like Germany 
(126 cities, 73%) or Poland (68 cities, 69%). Additionally, there are countries with large city samples and a 
lower percentage of people in proximity to green spaces 
like France (84 cities, 58%) and Italy (56 cities, 57In 
France, for example, we see a higher share of population
 with a more direct access to UGS in the northeastern
 part of the country and a lower one towards 
the south-western part. Generally, a curve that has a 
late onset and a steep slope means that more people 
have a more direct route to the nearest green spaces 
and vice versa. An example for this would be Finland, 
where about 32% of the urban population have an DI 
of more than 0.8. On the contrary, the curve of Norway 
has an early onset and a lower ending point, resulting 
in a smaller share of people (23%) having a DI in the 
highest 0.2 margin. 
The average LS values at green space entry of the European
 cities also show a large variation. For example, in 
figure 6 we can observe above average LS values at the 
green space entries in mid-to southwestern Germany. 
According to our results, in these areas the street segments
 at the UGS entries are highly visited, UGS are 
large and / or the population lives close to the UGS. In 
contrast, most of the cities in France or at the eastern 
coast of Italy feature rather low LS values. In Poland 
or the Netherlands, we find a mixed picture of cities 
with higher and lower LS values at green space entry. 
In figure 6 (bottom) we see the LS values aggregated 
on a country level. Every point that is plotted behind 
the box-plots represents the average LS value at green 
space entry of one city. Accordingly, we see that the 
differences in the number of cities where our analysis 
was feasible vary substantially between countries. At 
the bottom and top ends of the chart, there are countries
 where relatively few cities are included in the final 
analysis, like Greece, Luxembourg or Norway. From 
the countries with a larger share of cities that were eligible
 for our analysis, Italy has the largest spread of LS 
values. Like France and the Netherlands, Italy’s mean 
LS at UGS entry is at the line indicating the lowest 
25% of cities, while the mean values of Germany and 
Poland are in the middle of the 25% and the 75% lines. 
Again, a high average LS at UGS entry might indicate 
more people at the UGS entries, larger UGS and / or 
population living closer to UGS. 

4.3 Implementing walkability indices 
In this section we want to demonstrate how local planners
 can use the two walkability indicators that we applied
 before. Therefore, we return to the example of 
the LVP as outlined in section 3.1. We explore three 
potential alternatives in which we reshape the built environment
 as an expression of applied planning tools. 
In each alternative, we alter one of the core variables 
that are used to calculate LS and DI. In the first alternative,
 “unlimited access”, we assume that the LVP 
can be accessed from all around the park. For the second
 alternative, “densification”, we selected a number 
of UGS north of the LVP and replaced them with residential
 buildings. In the last alternative, “population 
growth”, we assume a certain increase in residents in 
the area surrounding the LVP. 
Alternative 1 – Unlimited access: 
In the first alternative,
 we demonstrate how the LS and DI indicators 
change if all barriers obstructing access to the LeneVoigt-
Park (LVP) were to be removed. We do so by 
assuming a park entry every 5 meters on the network 
surrounding Lene-Voigt-Park. As can be seen in figure 
7a, a decrease in LS values occurs on all streets that 
are adjacent to the LVP. On most of the remaining 
streets, we observe an increased LS. Thus, according 
to our model, removing the barriers along the edges 
of the LVP would result in less crowded streets surrounding
 the park, which may be a desirable effect for 
city planners. On the other hand, more people could 
reach the LVP, increasing the overall amount of people 
traveling through net network and towards the park. 
Accordingly, removing entry barriers could also be a 
pull factor for an UGS. 
Figure figure 7b shows the change of the DI values 
in the first alternative. When the DI of a building 
increases, the routes towards the nearest UGS have 
become more direct, representing a facilitated access 
to the nearest UGS for the residents of the building. 
Overall, we mostly observe minor changes of DI values
 (delta-DI ¡ 0.1) when providing unlimited access. 
We filtered out any delta-DI values that were smaller 
than +/-0.05 to place emphasis on the more significant 
changes. It appears as though the change of DI values 
is mostly limited to buildings that are either very close 
to the park or that were not reachable before, but are 
now inside the threshold network distance of 500 meters. A few buildings adjacent to the eastern part of the 
LVP express an increase larger than 10A larger area to 
the northeast and smaller areas to the east and south of 
the center of the LVP show a minor increase of DI values.
 These buildings may now be able to take a more 
efficient trajectory towards the LVP. In the northwest 
of the map we see a cluster of buildings that seems to 
have gained access to the LVP via a direct path, which 
increased their DI values. Contrary, in the southeast 
there is a couple of buildings that have gained access as 
well, but on a less direct path. For these buildings the 
DI values decreases, meaning the average trajectories 
towards the nearest UGS have become less efficient. 

Alternative 2 – Densification: 
In the second alternative
 we intended to see how the indices behave if 
the green spaces in the city blocks north of the LVP 
were to be developed into residential areas. To apply 
these changes, we switched the former park entries 
into building entries and distributed among them 
population according to the former park’s size. figure 
7c shows that overall, most of the LS values appear to 
decrease substantially. Since the UGS disappeared, the 
trajectories of the people that traveled to them have 
disappeared as well, leading to decreased LS. Only on 
the paths connecting the newly built residential areas 
to the LVP and the former Johannes-cemetery in the 
west 
can we see a substantial increase of LS val 
ues. 

Overall, the reduction of the number of parks in the 
area seems to have a larger effect on the LS-index 
than the increase in population due to the newly “constructed”
 residential buildings. 
In figure 7e we see DI values mostly increasing in the 
area. Especially the buildings along the Heinrichstraße 
that leads from the center of the LVP north experience 
a substantial DI increase. Again, a higher DI means 
more efficient routes to the nearest parks. Some areas 
in the east and north of the map express a decrease 
of DI values, representing less efficient trajectories towards
 the nearest UGS. South and west of the LVP 
we observe a mixed picture of minor de-and increases. 
The five green spaces that we intended to change into 
residential areas are comparatively small and, thus, 
“hard to reach”. Taking them out of the equation 
seems to leave the surrounding buildings with more 

efficient trajectories towards the larger parks. 
Alternative 3 – Population increase: 
The third alternative
 is designed to demonstrate how a population 
increase would affect the DI and LS indices. In this 
alternative, we assumed for each residential building a 
population increase to the 95th percentile of the population
 per area according to its urban atlas residential 
class. Since we did not change the locations of any 
green spaces or building entries, the DI index did not 
change, either. As we can see in figure 7e, the delta-LS 
is positive in the entire area. In contrast to the other 
alternatives, changes are now scattered across the entire
 map, since we also applied the population growth 
all buildings in the area. In this alternative, we see 
a similar pattern as in the basic LS map (see figure 
3). LS tends to grow larger, the closer a street is to 
one of the large parks, specially along those streets, 
where the population flows from multiple areas combine
 on their way towards the UGS. For example, we 
can observe high LS values between the LVP and the 
Friedenspark in the south of LVP. The further away a 
street is from the larger parks, the lower the increase 
of the LS. Close to LVP we now observe a large cluster 
with high LS values in the west. If we have a look at 
the population data that is attached to the residential 
buildings, we can see that the area in the northwest 
of the LVP has several buildings with very high population
 (see appendix for larger version of the image). 
Most of these buildings can reach the LVP only via the 
entry point at the northwest, which causes the high LS 
values in this area. 
Alternative 4 – Ensemble model: 
In the final alternative,
 we applied all the changes of the previous three 
alternatives at once. The joint effects of removing barriers,
 developing the green space in the north and a 
population increase can be seen in figure 7 f and g. 
Figure 7f, shows that the change of the LS index is 
mostly influenced by the population increase and the 
green space development alternatives. Due to the population
 increase, we see a general increase of LS, except 
for those streets that experience a decrease of LS due 
to the removed green spaces. This makes the changes 
of the LS appear more diffuse than in the other alternatives.
 Similar to the population increase alternative, 
we see a large area with high LS increase in the northwest
 of the LVP. In this alternative we can simultaneously
 observe the effects of the population increase and 
the unlimited access alternatives. The nearest entry 
point for the area with the high population residential
 buildings in the northwest has been shifted to the 
northernmost corner of the LVP in contrast to the third 
alternative. As we can observe in figure 7g, change of 
DI is restricted to those buildings that either reached 
one of the now developed green spaces before or that 
can reach the LVP through one of the new entry points. 
In the fourth alternative we can still see an overall increase
 in DI from removing the small and hard-to-reach 
green space in the north of the LVP. Also, the mixed 
effects from removing the entry barriers to the LVP 
can still be observed in the south or the northwest of 
the LVP. For both, LS and DI, the overall changes in 
this alternative appear more gradual than e.g. in the 
densification scenario and are most apparent where we 
applied intense constructional changes. 

5 Discussion 
In this paper, we developed a modeling approach that 
applies two walkability indices, the Local Significance 
(LS) and the Detour Index (DI) based on publicly available
 data and software tools (European Union, 2020; R 
Core Team, 2022; OpenStreetMap Contributors, 2020). 
We further demonstrated possible uses of LS and DI for 
city planners by using an urban park as a test case, the 
Lene Voigt Park in Leipzig. In a final step, we compared
 the two indices for a set of European cities in 
order to detect variations between different cities. The 
application of our workflow was feasible, and the results 
were – with limitations – comparable on a European 
scale. In a consistent method reflection we report on 
the benefits and limits of the applied procedure. 
Wolff mapped the LS with colored straight lines that 
directly connect residential areas with the respective 
UGS. His representation of the index enables an 
overview of potential overcrowding in individual UGS 
and the strength of expected recreational flows towards 
the green spaces (Wolff, 2021). By plotting the LS 
in a cumulative way on individual street segments, 
we enable an even more targeted representation of 
the flows. In an individual city, areas of high use 
intensity with potential for overcrowding can be 
identified at first glance as red clusters around the 
UGS’ in question. Consequently, researchers and city 
planners can utilize our results to distinguish potential 

overcrowding effects that might limit accessibility of 
a specific UGS at individual street segments or green 
space entry points in order to display crowding effects 
of the corresponding Service Connecting Areas (SCA) 
(Dworczyk and Burkhard, 2021; Barth´elemy, 2018). 
Our representation of the DI enables users at first glace 
to see which buildings have direct access to UGS, and 
weather they can reach UGS in and unobstructed manner.
 The index provides an estimation of potential detours
 people have to take in order to reach and UGS: 
the closer the route towards the UGS is to a straight 
line, the higher is the index DI suggesting a better 
accessibility. (Esch et al., 2014). Consequently, this 
index is a good proxy showing discontinuous accessibility
 options of people without suggesting an artificial 
dichotomous differentiation between having and nothaving
 access like indicated by fixed-distance buffers 
or isochrones. (e.g. Poelman (2018); Kabisch et al. 
(2016)). In some cases, the DI can be misleading, 
though. Low DI values may occur in close proximity 
to UGS as an artifact of small Euclidean and network 
distances values. In these cases, a minor difference can 
lead to a low DI value even though the overall traveling
 distance to the next green space entry is relatively 
small. 
Nonetheless, both walkability indices may be combined 
with local demographic, socioeconomic or environmental
 data, which can open up further opportunities for 
city planners. For example, traffic, air pollution or temperature
 or vegetation parameters along the street 
network might help in the decision process for intervention
 (Poelman, 2018). 
Comparing the two walkability indices on a European 
scale has shown similar results as past studies. The 
spatial patterns of high accessibility in central and 
northern Europe, and low accessibility in southern and 
eastern Europe, match those found in past studies. 
For example, Kabisch found a lower UGS availability 
in south-eastern Europe within, both 300 and 500 
meters (Kabisch et al., 2016). Poelman found similar 
results when using a proximity approach in 10 minutes 
walking distance for calculating a population weighted 
median of UGS area (Poelman, 2018). Both studies 
enabled a spatial assessment of unequal distribution of 
UGS in a city, or between cities on a European scale. 
By comparing the relation of the DI and the cumulative
 population, we can add to these findings by show
ing potential barriers people have to overcome on their 
way to UGS. Overall we could show a large variation
 across European countries. While in southern and 
Eastern Europe, UGS availability in 500 meters network
 distance is comparatively low, the accessibility of 
the UGS seems to be low, as well. In central and northern
 Europe, we observed not only high values of UGS 
availability, the routes people have to take to get there 
also seem relatively efficient. In countries with similar
 percentages of UGS accessibility like Norway and 
Germany the DI / population curve in figure 6 depicts 
that a larger share of urban dwellers have a more direct
 path towards UGS in Germany, because here, the 
onset of the curve happens later. On the other hand 
a late onset of the curve can result in an overall low 
accessibility, like in Italy, while an early onset can still 
yield a relatively high accessibility as in Norway. 
In comparing the average LS index values at UGS entries
 of the European cities, we found a cluster of cities 
with above average and high values in mid-to and 
south-western Germany. Cortinovis et al found that 
European cities have shifted from a de-densification to 
a densification regime due to growth of urban population,
 decrease of land-take for residential use and 
higher immigration (Cortinovis et al., 2022). Furthermore,
 Wolff and Haase showed in their 2019 paper, 
that in southern Germany most cities express high residential
 density as well as only average supply of UGS 
(Wolff and Haase, 2019). High population pressure and 
short distances to or an unequal distribution of UGS 
might lead to relatively high visitation rates at green 
space entries. These results confirm regional studies 
by Xu et al. from 2018 and 2020, who stated that a 
higher housing demand increases the pressure on GS 
availability (Xu et al., 2018, 2020). 
Former studies relying on Urban Atlas (UA) were able 
to compare all 788 cities that are covered by this product
 in 2018 (European Union, 2020). Enhancing the accuracy
 of the dataset by using OpenStreetMap (OSM) 
data has reduced the overall number of cities. In this 
regard, we found a gradient of OSM coverage from 
north-and central Europe towards southern and southeastern
 Europe. Consequently, mostly central European
 cities exhibited a sufficient data coverage for effective
 comparison (Poland, Czech Republic, Austria, 
Northern Italy, Switzerland, France, Netherlands). As 
long as the OpenStreetMap community is mostly active 
in central European countries, our approach is not really
 suited for a wholesome European comparison. Due 
to the incomplete digitization of buildings in OSM it is 
mostly a central European comparison. Furthermore, 
UA polygons that are covered by at least one OSM 
polygon is only a proxy for the potential coverage that 
may not yield inference about the nature and quality 
of the OSM data. In data-scarce regions, the DI should 
be accurate for all buildings that are digitized in OSM 
and that are covered by the UA dataset. 
To demonstrate potential applications for the two walkability
 indices for city planners and researchers, we implemented
 the LS and DI in three alternatives at our 
model case, the Lene Voigt Park LVP in Leipzig. In 
general, we can say that an increase of the DI value of a 
building is a desirable effect because the residents have 
a more efficient – or more direct – way to UGS. As a 
result, people might be incentivized to visit UGS more 
often and reap the positive effects of e.g. physical exercise
 or being in the nature (Kabisch et al., 2021a). In 
contrast, an increase of the LS value of a street segment 
can usually be deemed negative. If no larger changes in 
the built-up structure have been implemented, an increasing
 LS means more people traveling through the 
same network, resulting in more crowded streets which 
might have an adverse effect on UGS accessibility. 
The implementation of the LS and DI may not only 
help to assess green space demands of a city. The two 
indices might also help city planners to test the effects 
of their actions regarding green and blue infrastructure 
on green space supply and demand before implementation.
 Additionally, the LS and DI may facilitate planning
 the street network, as well as residential units of 
an area together with the green and blue infrastructure, 
enabling synergies between departments and avoiding 
potential pitfalls. 
In the first implementation, we modeled an unlimited 
access to the LVP by adding green space entry points 
every 5 meters on the outline of the park. At the 
immediate surrounding of the LVP, the LS index behaved
 as expected. Here, removing the entry barriers 
resulted in a decrease of the index, representing less 
crowding taking place, which is desirable for city planners,
 as it might alleviate the effects of overcrowding. 
Nonetheless, the implementation of the unlimited access
 alternative showed ambiguous effects. A UGS with 
less barriers might be more attractive, and thus, pull 
more people from the surrounding residential areas, resulting
 in more traffic in the remaining network and a 
higher overall visitation of the park itself. 
The DI values of most of the residential buildings express
 only minor changes. The small changes of the 
network distance that occur when the nearest green 
space entry point is shifted do not carry as much weight 
if network and Euclidean distance values are larger. 
In contrast, close to the LVP the small changes have 
a larger effect on the DI values, resulting mostly in 
substantial increases of the index. The contradicting 
effects on the DI values of those buildings that have 
‘gained’ access through removal of barriers show that 
considering the DI alone might not yield a full picture 
on UGS accessibility. 
The LS index reacts strongly on the changes that we 
have applied to the built-up structure in the area during
 the second alternative. Replacing the UGS with 
residential areas would cause the absolute number of 
people to use the network to increase. Our representation
 of the LS reacted contra-intuitively to the changes, 
though. Removing the UGS reduced the overall number
 of trajectories modeled, which in turn decreased 
the index values for most of the network. Only did the 
values increase at those street segments that lead from 
the converted UGS to the remaining ones. The strong 
LS decrease in most of the network, as well as its evenly 
strong increase at certain streets highlight the importance
 of the UGS that were changed into residential 
buildings: Many neighboring residents can potentially 
use these places for recreation, while converting them 
and bringing even more people in will cause the remaining
 UGS to be more crowded. 
Furthermore, the second alternative has shown that 
taking UGS that prove harder to reach out of the equation
 can increase the DI. An increasing DI itself mean 
that residents travel along efficient trajectories towards 
UGS. Thus, only considering DI values might implicate,
 that the green space accessibility for residents 
improves when green spaces are converted to build-up. 
Since we are only looking at distances, the index lacks 
to account for an in-or decrease of the number of alternative
 green spaces. 
Alternative two exemplifies one of the greatest 
weaknesses of our implementation of both indices: 
we merely account for the individual trajectories 
between residential buildings and green space entries 

without addressing the overall number of green spaces 
that are accessible per building. Consequently, our 
representation of LS and DI might still need further 
improvement in future studies to better represent the 
green space accessibility of urban dwellers. At the 
same time, our analysis highlights an acute lack of 
research in this regard. 
Alternative 3: Population increase The modeled population
 increase in alternative three resulted in a general 
increase of LS values in the entire area. Where the population
 flows from multiple areas combine on their way 
towards the UGS we can visualize potential crowding 
effects that might occur if population increasing trends 
tend to continue (Cortinovis et al., 2022). These results
 also enrich different more areal-based approaches 
as on different density patterns emerging from the constellation
 of population trajectories and built-up area 
changes (Wolff et al., 2017). 
Alternative 4: Ensemble model Finally, by uniting all 
changes, we see the complex interactions of built-up 
environment, population and UGS. At the first glance, 
the population increase seems to dominate the other 
changes. A closer look reveals the effects of converting 
the green spaces to residential area, as well as providing 
unlimited access to the LVP, though. Overall, changing
 the build-up environment turns out to have higher 
impact on the flows of residents towards UGS than the 
population. An increase in urban dwellers adds up to 
those crowding effects that are caused by other changes 
like in the densification alternative. 
There are several factors that limit out appraoch. 
First, both indices are only as good as the data 
that they are built on. Errors in the UA or OSM 
data sets might propagate from data preparation to 
index building and multiply on the way. Both indices 
only account for the fastest routes from residential 
buildings to UGS in a walking distance of 500 meters, 
given the underlying network. People might choose 
their routes towards UGS based on different factors 
than pure distance. Elements of attractiveness such 
as equipment, events etc. might encourage people 
to approach UGS in greater distances (Biernacka 
and Kronenberg, 2018; Biernacka et al., 2020). Our 
application of the LS and DI fails to account for 
obstacles people have to overcome on their ways to 
the nearest UGS like traffic lights, large streets or 
other physical barriers (see Barber et al. (2021)). 

Another important point is, that, by using the urban 
atlas classes 14100 and 31000, we have only accounted 
for publicly accessible green spaces. Furthermore, 
the role of private or residential green cannot be 
underestimated, since a high share of residents might 
prefer the use of their private green space over publicly 
accessible ones (Chiesura, 2004; S¨aumel et al., 2021). 
This effect might cause the LS values to overestimate 
the flow of people from their homes to UGS. By leaving 
private green out of the equation, we can not account 
for institutional barriers of accessibility (Wolff, 2021; 
Biernacka and Kronenberg, 2018). But combining the 
DI or LS with such measures might yield inference on 
a per building level instead of an UGS level, enabling 
quantitative and qualitative assessments with a higher 
accuracy than before (Biernacka et al. 2020). Lastly, 
reaching UGS by means of public transportation, 
private motorized transportation or cycling was not 
addressed by our study. By including public transport 
into the model future research might remove further 
uncertainties of our approach. 

6 Conclusions 
In this study, we modeled the walkability of European 
cities – i.e. the quality of the routes people take to 
reach urban green spaces (UGS) – using publicly availability
 data and software. The Detour Index (DI) and 
Local Significance (LS) indicators that we employed 
not only enable small scale and high-resolution analysis 
of green space accessibility in single cities, but also allow
 for a large-scale comparison of cities and countries 
in Europe. In adding to former research, we developed 
an approach for modeling the service connecting areas
 (SCA) between residents homes and UGS. Instead 
of providing a dichotomous measure of having or nothaving
 access to UGS, our approach enables inference 
about the SCA itself. Nonetheless, in this study we 
only provide a broad overview – cities have grown over 
millennia and each data point in our graphs is an individual
 case study with challenges for itself. Therefore, 
it is important to make the results accessible and available
 (e.g. on a website) for urban planners so they will 
actually use them in their specific contexts. Augmenting
 our results with environmental variables or other 
local data might enable researchers and city planners 
to better account for overcrowding effects and barriers 
that limit accessibility of UGS. 
To enhance modeling of the walkability of a city in 
the future, we need to take the environment into account:
 A more convenient walking experience on one 
street might cause people to change their trajectories 
and even take detours on their way towards UGS. At 
the same time, a less pleasant walk may cause the opposite
 behavior. Furthermore, certain features that are 
not reflected in the network we used, can turn out to be 
barriers for the accessibility of UGS, like large streets 
that have to be crossed. Even though most of the data 
that is required to account for these features might be 
hard to get and to harmonize, an implementation can 
be easily realized by re-running our program, once the 
data is present. Another point that the two indices are 
not sensitive for, is the fact that many residents have 
access to more than one UGS. Thus, building a new 
block of residential housing might not be as grave in 
a neighborhood with a plethora of alternative UGS. If 
the only park around is sealed and even more people 
are invited to live in the area, it can be a disadvantageous
 decision. A change of our index calculation 
process should account for UGS alternatives in future 
reasearch. Since the two walkability indices are only an 
approximation of the potential flows, GPS data as is 
produced by companies like e.g. Google or Apple could 
facilitate a far more sophisticated analysis. Especially 
overcrowding effects could be modeled with higher detail
 and even on a temporal scale. 

